HBR.ORG

SeptemBeR 2012 
reprinT r1209F

Are You Solving the 
Right Problem?

Most firms aren’t, and that undermines  
their innovation efforts. by Dwayne Spradlin

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

FOr ArTIClE rEPrInTs CAll 800-988-0886 Or 617-783-7500, Or vIsIT hbr.org

Dwayne Spradlin is the president and CEO 
of InnoCentive, an online marketplace that 
connects organizations with freelance problem 
solvers in a multitude of fields. He is a coauthor, 
with Alpheus Bingham, of The Open Innovation 
Marketplace: Creating Value in the Challenge 
Driven Enterprise (FT Press, 2011).

Are You 
Solving 
the right 
Problem?

Most firms aren’t, and that undermines  
their innovation efforts. by Dwayne Spradlin 

“If I were given one hour to save the planet, I would spend 59 minutes  
defining the problem and one minute resolving it,” Albert Einstein said. 

Those were wise words, but from what I have observed, most orga-
nizations don’t heed them when tackling innovation projects. In-
deed, when developing new products, processes, or even businesses, 
most companies aren’t sufficiently rigorous in defining the problems 
they’re attempting to solve and articulating why those issues are im-
portant. Without that rigor, organizations miss opportunities, waste 
resources, and end up pursuing innovation initiatives that aren’t 
aligned with their strategies. How many times have you seen a project 
go down one path only to realize in hindsight that it should have gone 
down another? How many times have you seen an innovation pro-
gram deliver a seemingly breakthrough result only to find that it can’t 
be implemented or it addresses the wrong problem? Many organiza-
tions need to become better at asking the right questions so that they 
tackle the right problems.

O
r
I
E
C
u
O
C
A
n
A
I
T
s
I
r
C
:

n
O
I
T
A
r
T
s
u
l
l
I

O
r
I
E
C
u
O
C
A
n
A
I
T
s
I
r
C
:

n
O
I
T
A
r
T
s
u
l
l
I

COPyrIgHT © 2012 HArvArd BusInEss sCHOOl PuBlIsHIng COrPOrATIOn. All rIgHTs rEsErvEd.
This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

September 2012 Harvard Business review 3

 
 
 
 
arE you SolviNg thE right problEM?

I offer here a process for defining problems that 
any organization can employ on its own. My firm, 
Inno Centive, has used it to help more than 100 cor-
porations, government agencies, and foundations 
improve the quality and efficiency of their innova-
tion efforts and, as a result, their overall performance. 
Through this process, which we call challenge-driven 
innovation, clients define and articulate their busi-
ness, technical, social, and policy issues and present 
them as challenges to a community of more than 
250,000 solvers—scientists, engineers, and other ex-
perts who hail from 200 countries—on InnoCentive.
com, our innovation marketplace. Successful solvers 
have earned awards of $5,000 to $1 million.

Since our launch, more than 10 years ago, we 
have managed more than 2,000 problems and solved 
more than half of them—a much higher proportion 
than most organizations achieve on their own. In-
deed, our success rates have improved dramatically 
over the years (34% in 2006, 39% in 2009, and 57% in 
2011), which is a function of the increasing quality of 
the questions we pose and of our solver community. 
Interestingly, even unsolved problems have been 
tremendously valuable to many clients, allowing 

them to cancel ill-fated programs much earlier than 
they otherwise would have and then redeploy their 
resources.

In our early years, we focused on highly specific 
technical problems, but we have since expanded, 
taking on everything from basic R&D and product 
development to the health and safety of astronauts 
to banking services in developing countries. We now 
know that the rigor with which a problem is defined 
is the most important factor in finding a suitable so-
lution. But we’ve seen that most organizations are 
not proficient at articulating their problems clearly 
and concisely. Many have considerable difficulty 
even identifying which problems are crucial to their 
missions and strategies. 

In fact, many clients have realized while working 
with us that they may not be tackling the right is-
sues. Consider a company that engages InnoCentive 
to find a lubricant for its manufacturing machinery. 
This exchange ensues:

InnoCentive staffer: “Why do you need the 

lubricant?”

Client’s engineer: “Because we’re now expect-
ing our machinery to do things it was not designed 

The Problem-Definition Process

EStabliSh thE 
NEED for a 
SolutioN

WHat iS tHe basic need?
WHat iS tHe desired 
outcome?
WHO StandS tO  
benefit and why?

JuStify  
thE NEED

iS tHe effORt aligned  
with our strategy?
WHat aRe tHe desired 
benefits for the company, 
and how will we measure 
them?
HOW Will We ensure 
that a solution is 
implemented?

CoNtExtualizE  
thE problEM

WHat appROacHeS 
Have we tried? 
WHat Have OtHeRS 
tried?
WHat aRe tHe internal 
and external constraints 
on implementing a 
solution?

WritE  
thE problEM 
StatEMENt

iS tHe pROBlem actually 
many problems? 
WHat RequiRementS 
muSt a solution meet?
WHicH pROBlem 
SOlveRS should we 
engage?
WHat infORmatiOn 
and language should 
the problem statement 
include?
WHat dO SOlveRS need 
to submit?
WHat incentiveS dO 
solvers need?
HOW Will SOlutiOnS 
be evaluated and success 
measured?

4  Harvard Business review September 2012

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

FOr ArTIClE rEPrInTs CAll 800-988-0886 Or 617-783-7500, Or vIsIT hbr.org

idea in brief
Eager to start working on solutions to innovation 
challenges, companies often don’t spend enough 
time and resources on defining the problems they’re 
trying to crack and establishing their importance to 
the organization. The results are missed opportuni-
ties, wasted resources, and initiatives that are out of 
sync with the strategy.

InnoCentive, an online innovation marketplace, 
has created a process that any organization can use 
to define problems and articulate their strategic 
importance. It involves four steps:

Clarifying the internal 
(company) or external 
(market or customer) 
need for a solution

Researching how the 
firm and other organiza-
tions have already tried 
to solve the problem

Articulating the 
strategic importance of 
the solution to the firm

Creating a clear and 
complete description of 
the problem

to do, and it needs a particular lubricant to 
operate.” 

InnoCentive staffer: “Why don’t you replace the 

machinery?” 

Client’s engineer: “Because no one makes equip-

ment that exactly fits our needs.” 

This raises a deeper question: Does the com-
pany need the lubricant, or does it need a new way 
to make its product? It could be that rethinking the 
manufacturing process would give the firm a new ba-
sis for competitive advantage. (Asking questions un-
til you get to the root cause of a problem draws from 
the famous Five Whys problem-solving technique 
developed at Toyota and employed in Six Sigma.)

The example is like many we’ve seen: Someone 
in the bowels of the organization is assigned to fix 
a very specific, near-term problem. But because the 
firm doesn’t employ a rigorous process for under-
standing the dimensions of the problem, leaders 
miss an opportunity to address underlying strategic 
issues. The situation is exacerbated by what Stefan 
Thomke and Donald Reinertsen have identified as 
the fallacy of “The sooner the project is started, the 
sooner it will be finished.” (See “Six Myths of Prod-
uct Development,” HBR May 2012.) Organizational 
teams speed toward a solution, fearing that if they 
spend too much time defining the problem, their su-
periors will punish them for taking so long to get to 
the starting line. 

Ironically, that approach is more likely to waste 
time and money and reduce the odds of success than 
one that strives at the outset to achieve an in-depth 
understanding of the problem and its importance 
to the firm. With this in mind, we developed a four-
step process for defining and articulating problems, 
which we have honed with our clients. It consists of 
asking a series of questions and using the answers to 
create a thorough problem statement. This process 
is important for two reasons. First, it rallies the orga-

nization around a shared understanding of the prob-
lem, why the firm should tackle it, and the level of 
resources it should receive. Firms that don’t engage 
in this process often allocate too few resources to 
solving major problems or too many to solving low-
priority or wrongly defined ones. It’s useful to assign 
a value to the solution: An organization will be more 
willing to devote considerable time and resources 
to an effort that is shown to represent a $100 mil-
lion market opportunity than to an initiative whose 
value is much less or is unclear. Second, the process 
helps an organization cast the widest possible net 
for potential solutions, giving internal and external 
experts in disparate fields the information they need 
to crack the problem. 

To illustrate how the process works, we’ll de-
scribe an initiative to expand access to clean drinking 
water undertaken by the nonprofit EnterpriseWorks/
VITA, a division of Relief International. EWV’s mis-
sion is to foster economic growth and raise the stan-
dard of living in developing countries by expanding 
access to technologies and helping entrepreneurs 
build sustainable businesses. 

The organization chose Jon Naugle, its techni-
cal director, as the initiative’s “problem champion.” 
Individuals in this role should have a deep under-
standing of the field or domain and be capable pro-
gram administrators. Because problem champions 
may also be charged with implementing solutions, 
a  proven  leader  with  the  authority,  responsibil-
ity, and resources to see the project through can be 
invaluable in this role, particularly for a larger and 
more strategic undertaking. Naugle, an engineer 
with more than 25 years of agricultural and rural- 
development experience in East and West Africa 
and the Caribbean, fit the bill. He was supported by 
specialists who understood local market conditions, 
available materials, and other critical issues related 
to the delivery of drinking water. 

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

September 2012 Harvard Business review 5

arE you SolviNg thE right problEM?

StEp 1 
Establish the Need for a Solution
The purpose of this step is to articulate the problem 
in the simplest terms possible: “We are looking for X 
in order to achieve Z as measured by W.” Such a state-
ment, akin to an elevator pitch, is a call to arms that 
clarifies the importance of the issue and helps secure 
resources to address it. This initial framing answers 
three questions:

What is the basic need? This is the essential 
problem, stated clearly and concisely. It is important 
at this stage to focus on the need that’s at the heart of 
the problem instead of jumping to a solution. Defin-
ing the scope is also important. Clearly, looking for 
lubricant for a piece of machinery is different from 
seeking a radically new manufacturing process. 

The basic need EWV identified was access to clean 
drinking water for the estimated 1.1 billion people in 
the world who lack it. This is a pressing issue even in 
areas that have plenty of rainfall, because the water is 
not effectively captured, stored, and distributed. 

What is the desired outcome? Answering this 
question requires understanding the perspectives of 
customers and other beneficiaries. (The Five Whys 
approach can be very helpful.) Again, avoid the 
temptation to favor a particular solution or approach. 
This question should be addressed qualitatively and 
quantitatively whenever possible. A high-level but 
specific goal, such as “improving fuel efficiency to 
100 mpg by 2020,” can be helpful at this stage.

In answering this question, Naugle and his team 
realized that the outcome had to be more than ac-
cess  to  water;  the  access  had  to  be  convenient. 
Women and children in countries such as Uganda 
often must walk long distances to fetch water from 
valleys and then carry it uphill to their villages. The 
desired outcome EWV defined was to provide water 
for daily family needs without requiring enormous 
expenditures of time and energy. 

Who stands to benefit and why? Answering 
this question compels an organization to identify 
all potential customers and beneficiaries. It is at this 
stage that you understand whether, say, you are 
solving a lubricant problem for the engineer or for 

the head of manufacturing—whose definitions of 
success may vary considerably. 

By pondering this question, EWV came to see 
that the benefits would accrue to individuals and 
families as well as to regions and countries. Women 
would spend less time walking to retrieve water, 
giving them more time for working in the field or in 
outside employment that would bring their families 
needed income. Children would be able to attend 
school. And over the longer term, regions and coun-
tries would benefit from the improved education 
and productivity of the population. 

StEp 2 
Justify the Need 
The purpose of answering the questions in this step 
is to explain why your organization should attempt 
to solve the problem. 

Is the effort aligned with our strategy? In 
other words, will satisfying the need serve the or-
ganization’s strategic goals? It is not unusual for an 
organization to be working on problems that are no 
longer in sync with its strategy or mission. In that 
case, the effort (and perhaps the whole initiative) 
should be reconsidered.

In the case of EWV, simply improving access to 
clean drinking water wouldn’t be enough; to fit the 
organization’s mission, the solution should generate 
economic development and opportunities for lo-
cal businesses. It needed to involve something that 
people would buy.

In addition, you should consider whether the 
problem fits with your firm’s priorities. Since EWV’s 
other projects included providing access to afford-
able products such as cookstoves and treadle pumps, 
the drinking water project was appropriate. 

What are the desired benefits for the com-
pany, and how will we measure them? In for-
profit companies, the desired benefit could be to 
reach a revenue target, attain a certain market share, 
or achieve specific cycle-time improvements. EWV 
hoped to further its goal of being a recognized leader 
in helping the world’s poor by transferring technol-
ogy through the private sector. That benefit would 

If the problem you want to solve is  
industrywide, it’s crucial to understand 
why the market has failed to address it. 

6  Harvard Business review September 2012

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

21FOr ArTIClE rEPrInTs CAll 800-988-0886 Or 617-783-7500, Or vIsIT hbr.org

be measured by market impact: How many families 
are paying for the solution? How is it affecting their 
lives? Are sales and installation creating jobs? Given 
the potential benefits, EWV deemed the priority to 
be high. 

How will we ensure that a solution is imple-
mented? Assume that a solution is found. Someone 
in the organization must be responsible for carrying 
it out—whether that means installing a new manu-
facturing technology, launching a new business, or 
commercializing a product innovation. That person 
could be the problem champion, but he or she could 
also be the manager of an existing division, a cross-
functional team, or a new department. 

At EWV, Jon Naugle was also put in charge of car-
rying out the solution. In addition to his technical 
background, Naugle had a track record of success-
fully implementing similar projects. For instance, 
he had served as EWV’s country director in Niger, 
where he oversaw a component of a World Bank pi-
lot project to promote small-scale private irrigation. 
His part of the project involved getting the private 
sector to manufacture treadle pumps and manually 
drill wells.

It is important at this stage to initiate a high-level 
conversation in the organization about the resources 
a solution might require. This can seem premature—
after all, you’re still defining the problem, and the 
field of possible solutions could be very large—but 
it’s actually not too early to begin exploring what 
resources your organization is willing and able to de-
vote to evaluating solutions and then implementing 
the best one. Even at the outset, you may have an 
inkling that implementing a solution will be much 
more expensive than others in the organization re-
alize. In that case, it’s important to communicate a 
rough estimate of the money and people that will 
be required and to make sure that the organization 
is willing to continue down this path. The result of 
such a discussion might be that some constraints on 
resourcing must be built into the problem statement. 
Early on in its drinking water project, EWV set a cap 
on how much it would devote to initial research and 
the testing of possible solutions.

Now that you have laid out the need for a solution 
and its importance to the organization, you must de-
fine the problem in detail. This involves applying a 
rigorous method to ensure that you have captured 
all the information that someone—including people 
in fields far removed from your industry—might 
need to solve the problem. 

s
k
r
O
W
E
s
I
r
P
r
E
T
n
E
F
O
y
s
E
T
r
u
O
C
:
y
H
P
A
r
g
O
T
O
H
P

elementS 
of A SucceSSful 
Solution

EnterpriseWorks/vITA 
surveyed potential 
customers in uganda 
to develop a list of 
must-have and nice-
to-have elements for 
a product that would 
provide access to 
clean drinking water. 
The winning solution, 
shown here in a 
ugandan village, met 
all the criteria.

Must-have 
1. A price, including instal-
lation, of no more than $20 

Nice-to-have
1. An aesthetically pleas-
ing design

2. Additional functional-
ity so that the unit could 
be used for multiple 
purposes

3. Features such as 
a modular design or 
salvageable parts that 
would add value to the 
device after its lifetime

2. storage capacity of at 
least 125 gallons 

3. A weight light enough 
for one adult to carry a half 
mile on rough paths

4. Material that would pre-
vent deterioration of water 
quality 

5. An estimate of the cost of 
operating and maintaining 
the device over three years 
and a clear explanation of 
how to repair and replace 
components 

6. A means, such as a filter, 
of removing gross organic 
matter from the incoming 
rain stream

7. A means, such as a tap or 
a pump, of extracting water 
without contaminating the 
contents of the unit 

8. A method for completely 
draining the water and 
cleaning the system

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

September 2012 Harvard Business review 7

 
 
 
arE you SolviNg thE right problEM?

How Well-defined Problems lead to Breakthrough solutions 

the Subarctic oil 
Problem

More than 20 years after the 1989 Exxon 
Valdez oil spill, cleanup teams operating 
in subarctic waters still struggled because 
oil became so viscous at low temperatures 
that it was difficult to pump from barges to 
onshore collection stations.

HOW tHe pROBlem WaS defined 
In its search for a solution, the Oil spill 
recovery Institute framed the problem as 
one of “materials viscosity” rather than “oil 
cleanup” and used language that was not 
specific to the petroleum industry. The goal 
was to attract novel suggestions from many 
fields. 

tHe WinneR A chemist in the cement 
industry was awarded $20,000 for propos-
ing a modification of commercially available 
construction equipment that would vibrate 
the frozen oil, keeping it fluid.

the AlS research 
Problem

By the late 2000s, researchers trying to de-
velop a cure or treatment for amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (Als, or lou gehrig’s 
disease) had not made much progress. One 
major obstacle was the inability to detect 
and track the progression of the disease 
accurately and quickly. Because research-
ers could not know precisely what stage 
Als sufferers had reached, they greatly 
increased the pool of participants in clinical 
trials and lengthened their studies, which 
drove up costs so much that few treatments 
were developed and evaluated. 

HOW tHe pROBlem WaS defined  
Instead of framing its initiative as a search 
for a cure, Prize4life, a nonprofit organi-
zation, focused on making Als research 
feasible and effective. The solution it sought 
was a biomarker that would enable faster 
and more-accurate detection and measure-
ment of the progression of the disease.

tHe WinneR In 2011, a researcher from 
Beth Israel Hospital in Boston was paid 
$1 million for a noninvasive, painless, and 
low-cost approach, which detects Als 
and assesses its progression by measuring 
changes in an electrical current traveling 
through muscle. This biomarker lowers the 
cost of Als research by providing accurate 
and timely data that allow researchers to 
conduct shorter studies with fewer patients. 

the Solar flare 
Problem

In 2009 nAsA decided it needed a better 
way to forecast solar flares in order to 
protect astronauts and satellites in space 
and power grids on Earth. The model it had 
been using for the past 30 years predicted 
whether radiation from a solar flare would 
reach Earth with only a four-hour lead time 
and no more than 50% accuracy. 

HOW tHe pROBlem WaS defined  
nAsA did not ask potential solvers simply 
to find a better way to predict solar flares; 
instead, it pitched the problem as a data 
challenge, calling on experts with analytic 
backgrounds to use one of the agency’s 
greatest assets—30 years of space weather 
data—to develop a forecasting model. 
This data-driven approach not only invited 
solvers from various fields but also enabled 
nAsA to provide instant feedback, using its 
archived data, on the accuracy of proposed 
models.

tHe WinneR A semiretired radio-frequency 
engineer living in rural new Hampshire 
used data analysis and original predictive 
algorithms to develop a forecasting model 
that provided an eight-hour lead time and 
85% accuracy. He was awarded $30,000 for 
this solution. 

StEp 3 
Contextualize the Problem 
Examining past efforts to find a solution can save 
time and resources and generate highly innovative 
thinking. If the problem is industrywide, it’s crucial 
to understand why the market has failed to address it.
What approaches have we tried? The aim 
here is to find solutions that might already exist in 
your organization and identify those that it has dis-
proved. By answering this question, you can avoid 
reinventing the wheel or going down a dead end.

In previous efforts to expand access to clean wa-
ter, EWV had offered products and services ranging 
from manually drilled wells for irrigation to filters for 

household water treatment. As with all its projects, 
EWV identified products that low-income consum-
ers could afford and, if possible, that local entrepre-
neurs could manufacture or service. As Naugle and 
his team revisited those efforts, they realized that 
both solutions worked only if a water source, such 
as surface water or a shallow aquifer, was close to 
the household. As a result, they decided to focus 
on rainwater—which falls everywhere in the world 
to a greater or lesser extent—as a source that could 
reach many more people. More specifically, the team 
turned its attention to the concept of rainwater har-
vesting. “Rainwater is delivered directly to the end 
user,” Naugle says. “It’s as close as you can get to a 

8  Harvard Business review September 2012

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

3FOr ArTIClE rEPrInTs CAll 800-988-0886 Or 617-783-7500, Or vIsIT hbr.org

 do you have the necessary  
support for soliciting and 
evaluating possible solutions? 
do you have the money and the 
people to implement the most 
promising one? 

External constraints are just as important to 
evaluate: Are there issues concerning patents or 
intellectual- property rights? Are there laws and 
regulations to be considered? Answering these ques-
tions may require consultation with various stake-
holders and experts. 

EWV’s  exploration  of  possible  external  con-
straints included examining government policies 
regarding rainwater storage. Naugle and his team 
found that the governments of Kenya, Tanzania, 
Uganda, and Vietnam supported the idea, but the 
strongest proponent was Uganda’s minister of wa-
ter and the environment, Maria Mutagamba. Con-
sequently, EWV decided to test the storage solution 
in Uganda. 

StEp 4 
Write the Problem Statement 
Now it’s time to write a full description of the prob-
lem you’re seeking to solve and the requirements 
the solution must meet. The problem statement, 
which captures all that the organization has learned 
through answering the questions in the previous 
steps, helps establish a consensus on what a viable 
solution would be and what resources would be re-
quired to achieve it.

A full, clear description also helps people both in-
side and outside the organization quickly grasp the 
issue. This is especially important because solutions 
to complex problems in an industry or discipline of-
ten come from experts in other fields (see “Getting 
Unusual Suspects to Solve R&D Puzzles,” HBR May 
2007). For example, the method for moving viscous 
oil from spills in Arctic and subarctic waters from 
collection barges to disposal tanks came from a 
chemist in the cement industry, who responded to 
the Oil Spill Recovery Institute’s description of the 
problem in terms that were precise but not specific 
to the petroleum industry. Thus the institute was 

piped water system without having a piped water 
supply.”

What have others tried? EWV’s investigation 
of previous attempts at rainwater harvesting in-
volved reviewing research on the topic, conducting 
five field studies, and surveying 20 countries to ask 
what technology was being used, what was and was 
not working, what prevented or encouraged the use 
of various solutions, how much the solutions cost, 
and what role government played. 

“One of the key things we learned from the sur-
veys,” Naugle says, “was that once you have a hard 
roof—which many people do—to use as a collection 
surface, the most expensive thing is storage.” 

Here was the problem that needed to be solved. 
EWV found that existing solutions for storing rain-
water, such as concrete tanks, were too expensive 
for low-income families in developing countries, so 
households were sharing storage tanks. But because 
no one took ownership of the communal facilities, 
they often fell into disrepair. Consequently, Naugle 
and his team homed in on the concept of a low-cost 
household rainwater-storage device. 

Their research into prior solutions surfaced what 
seemed initially like a promising approach: storing 
rainwater in a 525-gallon jar that was almost as tall as 
an adult and three times as wide. In Thailand, they 
learned, 5 million of those jars had been deployed 
over five years. After further investigation, however, 
they found that the jars were made of cement, which 
was available in Thailand at a low price. More impor-
tant, the country’s good roads made it possible to 
manufacture the jars in one location and transport 
them in trucks around the country. That solution 
wouldn’t work in areas that had neither cement nor 
high-quality roads. Indeed, through interviews with 
villagers in Uganda, EWV found that even empty 
polyethylene barrels large enough to hold only 50 
gallons of water were difficult to carry along a path. 
It became clear that a viable storage solution had to 
be light enough to be carried some distance in areas 
without roads. 

What are the internal and external con-
straints on implementing a solution? Now that 
you have a better idea of what you want to accom-
plish, it’s time to revisit the issue of resources and 
organizational commitment: Do you have the neces-
sary support for soliciting and then evaluating pos-
sible solutions? Are you sure that you can obtain the 
money and the people to implement the most prom-
ising one? 

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

September 2012 Harvard Business review 9

4arE you SolviNg thE right problEM?

able to solve in a matter of months a challenge that 
had stumped petroleum engineers for years. (To 
read the institute’s full problem statement, visit hbr.
org/problem-statement1.) 

Here are some questions that can help you de-

velop a thorough problem statement:

Is the problem actually many problems? 
The aim here is to drill down to root causes. Com-
plex, seemingly insoluble issues are much more ap-
proachable when broken into discrete elements. 

goals of being extremely specific but not unneces-
sarily technical. It shouldn’t contain industry or 
discipline jargon or presuppose knowledge of a par-
ticular field. It may (and probably should) include a 
summary of previous solution attempts and detailed 
requirements. 

With those criteria in mind, Naugle and his team 
crafted a problem statement. (The following is the 
abstract; for the full problem statement, visit hbr.
org/problem-statement2.) 

For EWV, this meant making it clear that the solu-
tion needed to be a storage product that individual 
households could afford, that was light enough to 

“EnterpriseWorks is seeking design ideas for  
a low-cost rainwater storage system that can be 
installed in households in developing countries.  

 To engage the largest number of solvers from the  
widest variety of fields, a problem statement must  
meet the twin goals of being extremely specific  
but not unnecessarily technical. 

be easily transported on poor-quality roads or paths, 
and that could be easily maintained. 

What requirements must a solution meet? 
EWV conducted extensive on-the-ground surveys 
with potential customers in Uganda to identify the 
must-have versus the nice-to-have elements of a 
solution. (See the sidebar “Elements of a Success-
ful Solution.”) It didn’t matter to EWV whether the 
solution was a new device or an adaptation of an ex-
isting one. Likewise, the solution didn’t need to be 
one that could be mass-produced. That is, it could 
be something that local small-scale entrepreneurs 
could manufacture.

Experts in rainwater harvesting told Naugle and 
his team that their target price of $20 was unachiev-
able, which meant that subsidies would be required. 
But a subsidized product was against EWV’s strategy 
and philosophy.

Which problem solvers should we engage? 
The dead end EWV hit in seeking a $20 solution from 
those experts led the organization to conclude that it 
needed to enlist as many experts outside the field as 
possible. That is when EWV decided to engage Inno-
Centive and its network of 250,000 solvers.

What information and language should 
the problem statement include? To engage the 
largest number of solvers from the widest variety 
of fields, a problem statement must meet the twin 

The solution is expected to facilitate access to clean 
water at a household level, addressing a problem 
that affects millions of people worldwide who are 
living in impoverished communities or rural areas 
where access to clean water is limited. domestic 
rainwater harvesting is a proven technology that 
can be a valuable option for accessing and storing 
water year round. However, the high cost of avail-
able rainwater storage systems makes them well 
beyond the reach of low-income families to install 
in their homes.

A solution to this problem would not only 

provide convenient and affordable access to scarce 
water resources but would also allow families, par-
ticularly the women and children who are usually 
tasked with water collection, to spend less time 
walking distances to collect water and more time 
on activities that can bring in income and improve 
the quality of life.” 

What do solvers need to submit? What infor-
mation about the proposed solution does your orga-
nization need in order to invest in it? For example, 
would a well-founded hypothetical approach be 
sufficient, or is a full-blown prototype needed? EWV 
decided that a solver had to submit a written expla-
nation of the solution and detailed drawings. 

What incentives do solvers need? The point 
of asking this question is to ensure that the right 

10  Harvard Business review September 2012

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

FOr ArTIClE rEPrInTs CAll 800-988-0886 Or 617-783-7500, Or vIsIT hbr.org

people are motivated to address the problem. For 
internal solvers, incentives can be written into job 
descriptions or offered as promotions and bonuses. 
For external solvers, the incentive might be a cash 
award. EWV offered to pay $15,000 to the solver who 
provided the best solution through the InnoCentive 
network.

How will solutions be evaluated and suc-
cess measured? Addressing this question forces 
a company to be explicit about how it will evalu-
ate the solutions it receives. Clarity and transpar-
ency are crucial to arriving at viable solutions and 
to ensuring that the evaluation process is fair and 
rigorous. In some cases a “we’ll know it when we 
see it” approach is reasonable—for example, when 
a company is looking for a new branding strategy. 
Most of the time, however, it is a sign that earlier 
steps in the process have not been approached with 
sufficient rigor.

EWV stipulated that it would evaluate solutions 
on their ability to meet the criteria of low cost, high 
storage capacity, low weight, and easy maintenance. 
It  added  that  it  would  prefer  designs  that  were 
modular (so that the unit would be easier to trans-
port) and adaptable or salvageable or had multiple 
functions (so that owners could reuse the materials 
after the product’s lifetime or sell them to others for 
various applications). The overarching goal was to 
keep costs low and to help poor families justify the 
purchase. 

The Winner
Ultimately, the solution to EWV’s rainwater-storage 
problem came from someone outside the field: a 
German inventor whose company specialized in 
the design of tourist submarines. The solution he 
proposed required no elaborate machinery; in fact, 
it had no pumps or moving parts. It was an estab-
lished industrial technology that had not been ap-
plied to water storage: a plastic bag within a plastic 
bag with a tube at the top. The outer bag (made of 
less-expensive, woven polypropylene) provided the 
structure’s strength, while the inner bag (made of 
more-expensive, linear low-density polyethylene) 
was impermeable and could hold 125 gallons of wa-
ter. The two-bag approach allowed the inner bag to 
be thinner, reducing the price of the product, while 
the outer bag was strong enough to contain a ton and 
a half of water.

The structure folded into a packet the size of a 
briefcase and weighed about eight pounds. In short, 

the solution was affordable, commercially viable, 
could be easily transported to remote areas, and 
could be sold and installed by local entrepreneurs. 
(Retailers make from $4 to $8 per unit, depending on 
the volume they purchase. Installers of the gutters, 
downspout, and base earn about $6.)

EWV developed an initial version and tested it 
in Uganda, where the organization asked end users 
such questions as What do you think of its weight? 
Does it meet your needs? Even mundane issues like 
color came into play: The woven outer bags were 
white, which women pointed out would immedi-
ately look dirty. EWV modified the design on the ba-
sis of this input: For example, it changed the color of 
the device to brown, expanded its size to 350 gallons 
(while keeping the target price of no more than $20 
per 125 gallons of water storage), altered its shape to 
make it more stable, and replaced the original siphon 
with an outlet tap.

After 14 months of field testing, EWV rolled out 
the commercial product in Uganda in March 2011. 
By the end of May 2012, 50 to 60 shops, village sales 
agents, and cooperatives were selling the product; 
more than 80 entrepreneurs had been trained to in-
stall it; and 1,418 units had been deployed in eight 
districts in southwestern Uganda.

EWV deems this a success at this stage in the 
rollout. It hopes to make the units available in 10 
countries—and have tens or hundreds of thousands 
of units installed—within five years. Ultimately, it 
believes, millions of units will be in use for a variety 
of applications, including household drinking water, 
irrigation, and construction. Interestingly, the main 
obstacle to getting people to buy the device has 
been skepticism that something that comes in such 
a small package (the size of a typical five-gallon jer-
rican) can hold the equivalent of 70 jerricans. Believ-
ing that the remedy is to show villagers the installed 
product, EWV is currently testing various promotion 
and marketing programs. 

aS thE EWv Story illustrates, critically analyzing and 
clearly articulating a problem can yield highly inno-
vative solutions. Organizations that apply these sim-
ple concepts and develop the skills and discipline to 
ask better questions and define their problems with 
more rigor can create strategic advantage, unlock 
truly groundbreaking innovation, and drive better 
business performance. Asking better questions de-
livers better results. 

hbr reprint r1209F

This document is authorized for use only in Manuel Lopez's MDBI_Sep2021_S3 - Business Models & Digital Disruption at IE Business School from Oct 2021 to Sep 2022.

September 2012 Harvard Business review 11

